docs/variants_of_interest_readme.md, before:

# Mutations of Interest Package

The mutations of interest package takes a DAIS-ribosome output from your samples of interest, a reference table with sequences that have been aligned using DAIS-ribosome and a table containing the amino acid mutations of interest as inputs. The output is a list of nucleotide and amino acid mutations that were found within the given samples when compared to the reference.

## DAIS-ribosome output of samples should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
s3_4   A_HA_H1   CALI07   HA-signal   e414bb92673b4dcbd44904630366ab9f   MKAILVVLLYTFTTANA   MKAILVVLLYTFTTANA   b7f1bb79d3fc87c1eb076af599c4f99e8fa7d183   false   false   ATGAAGGCAATACTAGTAGTTCTGCTGTATACATTTACAACCGCAAATGCA   ATGAAGGCAATACTAGTAGTTCTGCTGTATACATTTACAACCGCAAATGCA   1..51   1..51
s1_4   A_HA_H3   HK4801   HA-signal   abd16f5208e6affe54d06d3ba7365f6e   MKAIIALSNILCLVFA   MKAIIALSNILCLVFA   0456cc08adaf88e3a88469276ac3b69b9278dfaf   false   false   ATGAAGGCTATCATTGCTTTGAGCAACATTCTATGTCTTGTTTTCGCT   ATGAAGGCTATCATTGCTTTGAGCAACATTCTATGTCTTGTTTTCGCT   1..48   1..48
s1_7   A_MP   HK4801   M2   feacaf2e5966faa102eea35f5145a657   MSLLTEVETPIRNEWGCRCNDSSNPLVVAANIIGILHLILWILDRLFFKCVYRLFKHGLKRGPSTEGVPESMREEYRKEQQNAVDADESHFVSIELE*   MSLLTEVETPIRNEWGCRCNDSSNPLVVAANIIGILHLILWILDRLFFKCVYRLFKHGLKRGPSTEGVPESMREEYRKEQQNAVDADESHFVSIELE*   332c058b16e9b4194021980f77c4a50c2090e8ec   false   false   ATGAGCCTTCTTACCGAGGTCGAAACACCTATCAGAAACGAATGGGGGTGCAGATGCAACGATTCAAGTAATCCACTTGTTGTTGCCGCGAATATCATTGGGATCTTGCACTTGATATTATGGATTCTTGATCGTCTTTTTTTCAAATGCGTCTATCGACTCTTCAAACACGGCCTTAAAAGAGGCCCTTCTACGGAAGGTGTGCCTGAGTCTATGAGGGAAGAATACCGAAAGGAACAGCAGAATGCTGTGGATGCTGACGAAAGTCATTTTGTCAGCATAGAATTGGAGTAA   ATGAGCCTTCTTACCGAGGTCGAAACACCTATCAGAAACGAATGGGGGTGCAGATGCAACGATTCAAGTAATCCACTTGTTGTTGCCGCGAATATCATTGGGATCTTGCACTTGATATTATGGATTCTTGATCGTCTTTTTTTCAAATGCGTCTATCGACTCTTCAAACACGGCCTTAAAAGAGGCCCTTCTACGGAAGGTGTGCCTGAGTCTATGAGGGAAGAATACCGAAAGGAACAGCAGAATGCTGTGGATGCTGACGAAAGTCATTTTGTCAGCATAGAATTGGAGTAA   1..26;715..982   1..26;27..294
```

## The Reference Table input should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
isolate_id   isolate_name   subtype   passage_history   nt_id   ctype   reference_id   protein   aa_aln   cds_aln
EPI_ISL_25690   A/common magpie/Hong Kong/5052/2007   A / H5N1      2b14fd2e8f738834298e9099f00e59d020ffc552   A_HA_H5   VT1203   HA-signal   .....LLFAIVSLVKS   ...............CTTCTTTTTGCAATAGTCAGCCTTGTTAAAAGC
EPI_ISL_140   A/Hong Kong/1073/99   A / H9N2      a591bc9ad3a54f705940ad8483684cfc278c742c   A_HA_H9   BGD0994   HA-signal   METISLITILLVVTASNA   ATGGAAACAATATCACTAATAACTATACTACTAGTAGTAACAGCAAGCAATGCA
```

### The Known Mutations of Interest Table input should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
protein position    mutation_of_int phenotypic_consensus
HA   7   H    inference description
HA   8   Q    inference description
HA   94   N   inference description
HA   121   N   inference description 
```

After cloning the mira-oxide repo, execute this command to create a mutations of interest table for the samples:

```bash
cargo run -p mutations_of_interest_table -- -i <PATH>/DAIS_ribosome.seq -r <PATH>/ref_table.txt -o <PATH>/outputs.csv -m <PATH>/muts_of_interest.txt
```

If you would like the output to have another deliminator (default: ","), then the `-d` flag can be used to pass another deliminator.

### The Mutations of Interest Table output should be structured like this (comma delimited)

```text
sample, reference_strain,gisaid_accession,ctype,dais_reference,protein,nt_mutation,aa_mutation,phenotypic_consequence
s3_4,A/Georgia/12/2022,EPI_ISL_15724408,A_HA_H1,CALI07,HA,G:923:A,R:308:K,Inference description
s3_4,A/Wisconsin/67/2022,EPI_ISL_15928538,A_HA_H1,CALI07,HA,G:923:A,R:308:K,Inference description
s3_4,A/Michigan/383/2018,EPI_ISL_320690,A_HA_H1,CALI07,HA,G:923:A,R:308:K,Inference description
s3_4,A/Michigan/383/2018,EPI_ISL_320690,A_HA_H1,CALI07,HA,G:924:A,R:308:K,Inference description
s3_4,A/West Virginia/30/2022,EPI_ISL_15724406,A_HA_H1,CALI07,HA,G:923:A,R:308:K,Inference description
s1_2,A/duck/Bangladesh/19097/2013,EPI_ISL_151729,A_PB1,HK4801,PB1,C:295:.,H:99:.,amino acid information missing
s1_2,A/duck/Bangladesh/19097/2013,EPI_ISL_151729,A_PB1,HK4801,PB1,A:296:.,H:99:.,amino acid information missing
s1_2,A/duck/Bangladesh/19097/2013,EPI_ISL_151729,A_PB1,HK4801,PB1,C:297:.,H:99:.,amino acid information missing
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Mutations of Interest Package Version 0.3.0

![Alt text](../assets/images/coming_soon.png)

Commit message:

Add nf samplesheet process and zoe simd updates (#64)
* fupdate zoe to fix compilation error. new create_nextflow_sample_sheet process

* lint changes

* update docs

* updated docs

* version bump

* start the addition of samplesheer_check process for MIRA-NF

* update create_nextflow samplesheet to tell you when a fastq files is missing

* added logic to indicate when the fastq file is empty and remove it from workflow

* update change log

* update the samplesheet header names to have no whitespace. Allow both fastq fq inptu for illumina fastq files

* update column names

* using SIMD sw alignment for faster aligning of sequences

* Report tweaks (#65)

* remove minor indel column. Only insert ha clade information to the row with ha segment

* updating report so that minor variant and minor indel files rint all data with no filtering. But QC check only counts minor vars wit frequency >= 0.05

* update variable name for consistency

* remove unused indel column from summary json

* add AllAllelesData struct for allAlleles.txt ingest

* add logic to read in allAllelles.txt to AllAllelesData struct

* writing allAlleles.txt to all_alleles.parq if the -f flag is invoked

* update changelog

* update changlog

* changes values to float and handle empty values as null

---------

Co-authored-by: Sam Wiley <dzw2@cdc.gov>

docs/variants_of_interest_readme.md, after:

# Variants of Interest Package

The variants of interest package takes a DAIS-ribosome output from your samples of interest, a reference table with sequences that have been aligned using DAIS-ribosome and a table containing the amino acid mutations of interest as inputs. The output is a list of samples with codon with aa and codon infromation that had nucleotide variations at the specificed positions when compared to the reference. 

## DAIS-ribosome output of samples should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
s3_4   A_HA_H1   CALI07   HA-signal   e414bb92673b4dcbd44904630366ab9f   MKAILVVLLYTFTTANA   MKAILVVLLYTFTTANA   b7f1bb79d3fc87c1eb076af599c4f99e8fa7d183   false   false   ATGAAGGCAATACTAGTAGTTCTGCTGTATACATTTACAACCGCAAATGCA   ATGAAGGCAATACTAGTAGTTCTGCTGTATACATTTACAACCGCAAATGCA   1..51   1..51
s1_4   A_HA_H3   HK4801   HA-signal   abd16f5208e6affe54d06d3ba7365f6e   MKAIIALSNILCLVFA   MKAIIALSNILCLVFA   0456cc08adaf88e3a88469276ac3b69b9278dfaf   false   false   ATGAAGGCTATCATTGCTTTGAGCAACATTCTATGTCTTGTTTTCGCT   ATGAAGGCTATCATTGCTTTGAGCAACATTCTATGTCTTGTTTTCGCT   1..48   1..48
s1_7   A_MP   HK4801   M2   feacaf2e5966faa102eea35f5145a657   MSLLTEVETPIRNEWGCRCNDSSNPLVVAANIIGILHLILWILDRLFFKCVYRLFKHGLKRGPSTEGVPESMREEYRKEQQNAVDADESHFVSIELE*   MSLLTEVETPIRNEWGCRCNDSSNPLVVAANIIGILHLILWILDRLFFKCVYRLFKHGLKRGPSTEGVPESMREEYRKEQQNAVDADESHFVSIELE*   332c058b16e9b4194021980f77c4a50c2090e8ec   false   false   ATGAGCCTTCTTACCGAGGTCGAAACACCTATCAGAAACGAATGGGGGTGCAGATGCAACGATTCAAGTAATCCACTTGTTGTTGCCGCGAATATCATTGGGATCTTGCACTTGATATTATGGATTCTTGATCGTCTTTTTTTCAAATGCGTCTATCGACTCTTCAAACACGGCCTTAAAAGAGGCCCTTCTACGGAAGGTGTGCCTGAGTCTATGAGGGAAGAATACCGAAAGGAACAGCAGAATGCTGTGGATGCTGACGAAAGTCATTTTGTCAGCATAGAATTGGAGTAA   ATGAGCCTTCTTACCGAGGTCGAAACACCTATCAGAAACGAATGGGGGTGCAGATGCAACGATTCAAGTAATCCACTTGTTGTTGCCGCGAATATCATTGGGATCTTGCACTTGATATTATGGATTCTTGATCGTCTTTTTTTCAAATGCGTCTATCGACTCTTCAAACACGGCCTTAAAAGAGGCCCTTCTACGGAAGGTGTGCCTGAGTCTATGAGGGAAGAATACCGAAAGGAACAGCAGAATGCTGTGGATGCTGACGAAAGTCATTTTGTCAGCATAGAATTGGAGTAA   1..26;715..982   1..26;27..294
```

## The Reference Table input should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
isolate_id   isolate_name   subtype   passage_history   nt_id   ctype   reference_id   protein   aa_aln   cds_aln
EPI_ISL_25690   A/common magpie/Hong Kong/5052/2007   A / H5N1      2b14fd2e8f738834298e9099f00e59d020ffc552   A_HA_H5   VT1203   HA-signal   .....LLFAIVSLVKS   ...............CTTCTTTTTGCAATAGTCAGCCTTGTTAAAAGC
EPI_ISL_140   A/Hong Kong/1073/99   A / H9N2      a591bc9ad3a54f705940ad8483684cfc278c742c   A_HA_H9   BGD0994   HA-signal   METISLITILLVVTASNA   ATGGAAACAATATCACTAATAACTATACTACTAGTAGTAACAGCAAGCAATGCA
```

### The Known Variants of Interest Table input should be structured like this (tab delimited)

```text
subtype	protein	positions	amino_acid	phenotypic_consequence
A / H1N1	NA	275	Y	true
A / H1N1	NA	223	X	true
A / H1N1	NA	119	V	true
A / H1N1	NA	292	K	true
A / H1N1	NA	294	S	true
A / H1N1	NA	197	N	true
A / H1N1	PA	38	T	true
A / H3N2	NA	119	V	true
B	NA	197	N	true
B	PA	38	T	true
```

After cloning the mira-oxide repo, execute this command to create a variants of interest table for the samples:

```bash
cargo run -p variants-of-interest -- -i <PATH>/DAIS_ribosome.seq -r <PATH>/ref_table.txt -o <PATH>/outputs.csv -m <PATH>/variants_of_interest.txt
```

If you would like the output to have another deliminator (default: ","), then the `-d` flag can be used to pass another deliminator.

### The Variants of Interest Table output should be structured like this (comma delimited)

```text
sample,reference_strain,gisaid_accession,ctype,dais_reference,protein,sample_codon,reference_codon,aa_mutation,phenotypic_consequence
sample_4_3,A/West Virginia/30/2022,EPI_ISL_15724406,A_PA,HK4801,PA,ATT,ATA,I:38:I,
sample_3_3,A/California/07/2009,EPI_ISL_227813,A_PA,HK4801,PA,ATA,ATT,I:38:I,
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Variants of Interest Package with Minor Variants

![Alt text](../assets/images/coming_soon.png)
